# Project Proposal
## Project Description
The purpose of this project is to better understand how accessible care for mental health is in the United States. Though originally our group wanted to focus on broad factors that affect one’s access to general healthcare, we found interesting research and data related specifically to the breakdown of mental health care in the United States. We hope to draw conclusions about mental health to hopefully reduce the stigma associated with it, and to better understand where these services are regularly utilized in hopes to bring more attention to the areas that may not have as much access to mental health services.
## [Related work 1: Cohen Veteran’s Network’s America’s Mental Health 2018 Study](https://www.cohenveteransnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Press-Release-Americas-Mental-Health-2018-FINAL.pdf)
Ketchum Analytics helped the Cohen Veteran’s Network and the National Council for Behavioral Health gain a better understanding of the current attitudes and access to mental health services for Americans. They took an online survey of 5,000 Americans, representative of the US population based on age, gender, region, household income, and race/ethnicity. They found that low healthcare access, including high cost and insufficient insurance coverage, limited options and long waits, and lack of awareness all contribute to insufficient mental health services, which in turn affects mental health outcomes.
## [Related work 2: Common Mental Health Disorders: Identification and Pathways to Care](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK92265/)
The British Psychological Society & The Royal College of Psychiatrists did a study on mental health disorders. Section 4 of this study focused on healthcare access, and the effects it had on mental health. The study found that in addition to the factors that affect healthcare access for all individuals, there should be considered additional factors regarding certain vulnerable groups (the study chose to focus on minority ethnic groups and elderly people). There were three listed factors of healthcare access: individual-level factors, practitioner-level factors, and resource-based/practical factors. Each factor being broken down by: general population, minority ethnic groups, and elderly people.
## [Related Work 3: Impact of residential displacement on healthcare access and mental health among original residents of gentrifying neighborhoods in New York City](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0190139)
The goal of this study was to make quantitative assessments of the health impacts of socioeconomic displacement in New York City. The study found that adults who moved into non-gentrifying, poor neighbourhoods had a higher number of ED visits, hospitalizations, and mental health-related visits for about 5 years after displacement. The study linked these findings with the negative impacts that residential displacement had on healthcare access and mental health.

## [Dataset 1: 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health Detailed Tables (SAMHSA)](https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2018-nsduh-detailed-tables)
The results of the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health are described in detailed tables that present national estimates on varying categories. There are tables displaying information from youths and adults, and measures behaviors based on a variety of demographic and geographic characteristics. There are also measures of prevalence of mental health disorders, substance use, and availability of treatment.

## Target Audience
The target audience for this report would be anyone who is interested in public health, but also may not realize the implications that social and environmental factors have on one’s health and wellbeing. However, a lot of medical providers might also be interested in this analysis in order to accommodate for areas and families who might fall under the category of low access As our data is primarily focused on how healthcare accessibility affects the outcomes of mental health, audiences who might struggle with finding mental health resources could also be a target audience for our project.

### Some specific questions that our project would aim to answer are:
- How are mental health services being utilized across the United States?
- What types of mental health services are being received?
- What type of professionals are being seen?
- What is the prevalence of mental health issues in certain communities?


## Technical Description
Our anticipated format for our project will be a Shiny Application to be able to build interactive visualizations for our users to see. We hope that this format would allow accessibility to view the site from any browser without needing any login information. We hope that our visualizations will be clearly depicted and engaging so that it allows the users to be interested in learning from our analysis.

One data collection challenge could be the difficulty parsing through large data sets, and aggregating the data to only what is necessary for our analysis. A second challenge of data collection that is more specific to our project is a misrepresentation of the populations being surveyed. One factor of low healthcare access is often low connectivity and these groups might not be represented in the data that is presented on online sources.

As we are in the planning phase of our project, we don’t anticipate having any extremely new technical skills in order to complete this project. We will have to learn best methods to clean and aggregate messy datasets, as most of our data from class is often prepared for us. Because we aim to create graphs and visualizations based on what we learned from class, we would use those assignments as models to create our final project. Though this may change in the future stages of our project as we might want to create a new visualization or create a page that we haven’t practiced before, and will want to learn how to create those.

One major challenge could be the validity of the data that we are accessing, as they are found on public resources recorded over a variety of different years. We also would need to make sure that the populations being described in our analysis are properly represented by the data that we display. We also would want to make sure that the ways in which we analyze our data does not skew the expected outcomes of our research.
